There are many algorithms that are used in deep learning, but it is no understatement to claim that
the gradient descent algorithm is the single most important, most fundamental algorithm in all of deep
learning.
In fact, without gradient descent, deep learning simply would not exist, and deep learning is also
important in other areas of machine learning and AI and optimization.
Fortunately, deep learning algorithm is actually not that complicated, and it doesn't involve a lot
of really intense math.
In fact, it's really just using derivatives and a little bit of algebra.
And so in this video I'm going to motivate why we need something like gradient descent.
And then I will explain the gradient descent algorithm.
I'm going to hold off on illustrating gradient descent in Python for now because I want to make sure
that the concepts are clear before we switch to code.
So let me start by providing a motivation.
Here is I'm going to show you three steps or state the three steps of how deep learning models actually
learn.
Step one is to just guess a solution.
We guess a solution randomly.
Step two is to compute the error, which is the mistakes, or whether the solution, whether the model
guess was correct or incorrect and how incorrect it was.
So for example, let's imagine we show the model.
We have some deep learning model.
We give it a picture of a cat, and the model guesses a solution.
And it says, you know, I think that's a picture of a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.
Well, you know, that's that's wrong.
So we have to figure out how to compute the error.
The model made a mistake and we compute the error.
Now this these two steps here are actually pretty trivial.
Step one is is really very simple.
Step two is also fairly straightforward.
It's kind of trivial.
The problem and where this starts to get difficult is step three.
And step three is where we learn from our mistakes, or the model learns from its mistakes to modify
the parameters.
And the goal of modifying the parameters is to give a better guess of a solution the next time around.
Now what we need to do is is figure out how to convert this statement, which you know, this should
make sense.
Step three this makes sense to us, but we need to convert this from a statement that makes sense to
us humans conceptually into a mathematical framework that a model can actually implement and compute.
So we need a mathematical description of the error, the landscape of the errors of the problem.
And we need a way to we need to discover a way to find the minimum of that error landscape.
So we need to be able to tell the model how to make fewer errors, how to learn from the mistakes,
how to modify the parameters so that the errors are smaller in the future so that the guesses are better.
And this is important, of course, because the smaller the errors, the fewer mistakes we make, the
better the model is going to guess at a solution, the more accurate the model is going to be.
Okay.
So and then how do we create these error descriptions and how do we learn from our mistakes.
Well this is where calculus comes to the rescue.
And in particular derivatives.
So this is the core idea of gradient descent.
The core idea of gradient descent is that we figure out a way to represent the errors, the mistakes
that the model is making as a mathematical function.
And then we find the minimum of that function.
So the minimum of the function, the minimum of the error function means that the model is making the
fewest mistakes possible.
Now, I showed you a plot that looks something like this several videos ago where I showed x squared.
So this is a function that would look like x squared.
There I labeled this axis x and I labeled this axis f of x or y equals f of x equals x squared.
The same concept.
Here we are using the parameter name w.
This stands for weights, but it's just another parameter.
You can think of it as a variable like x.
This is the function in gradient descent.
It's it's common to use j of w which indicates the loss function or the error function.
And then our goal is to get the model to have the smallest errors as possible, which means finding
the minimum of this function.
And this is what we do with gradient descent.
Now what does this word even mean?
Gradient descent.
Well, the term gradient is exactly the same thing as a derivative.
People typically use the word derivative For, you know, like one dimensional functions like this that
you can plot on a two dimensional axis when you have a larger number of dimensions, two dimensions,
four dimensions, a billion dimensions, lots and lots of parameters.
Then we start using the term gradient instead of derivative.
But the concept is exactly the same.
Everything you've ever learned about derivatives you apply to gradients, okay.
And descent of course, just means to go down.
Like the descent into madness means they go down into craziness.
So gradient descent is simply following the derivative down to get to the function minimum.
So this is what a one dimensional function might look like.
Here is an example of a two dimensional function.
So now we start off at some random point.
Here we're starting off at some random initial weights initial point, initial guess.
And then we slowly start moving down towards the minimum.
Now, in one dimension and in two dimensions, it's possible to visualize the process of gradient descent
in higher dimensions.
It's totally impossible.
We just have to trust the algebra and the math.
Of course, the math is the same regardless of the number of dimensions.
Okay, so let's work through a numerical example.
Here is a function.
This is a polynomial function.
So we need to compute its derivative.
If you would like to pause the video and compute the derivative of this function, then I think that
would be a pretty nice way to spend 10s of your life.
Okay, so anyway, here's the function.
Here's the derivative.
It is six x because we bring the two down, multiply the three.
Then the two disappears because implicitly there's a one here.
This x has a one in the exponent.
So that multiplies the three.
And then the x here turns into x to the power of zero which is just one.
So that also disappears.
And here this is a term without a variable.
So that just disappears as well.
Okay, now we can make a plot of this function.
Let's imagine this is our error function.
This is the thing we want to minimize.
And here is its derivative in orange.
So we see the blue plot and the orange plot.
So now our goal is to find the minimum of this function.
Where is this function at its smallest value.
Well I mean obviously you know, visually in this one dimensional case we can just look at the graph
and see.
But the minimum of this function is also going to correspond to the where the derivative equals zero.
Now remember we don't want to minimize the derivative.
We want to minimize the function.
And the function is minimized where the derivative is zero.
All right.
And so how do we find the function minimum using gradient descent.
So here is the gradient descent algorithm.
You can see it's only a couple of steps.
So the first step is to initialize some random guess of a minimum we just randomly guess where's the
minimum of this function?
Totally at random.
Maybe we're going to initialize our guess to minus two.
That's you know, it's kind of far away.
Maybe, you know, our initial guess will be 0.6.
In which case we're pretty close.
So we initialize a totally random guess, and then we have a loop over here.
This is a for loop.
We loop over some number of iterations.
And how many iterations do we loop over.
Well that's a parameter of learning.
We will discuss that in the future.
So the first thing we do inside this loop is to compute the derivative at the the initial guess at our
guess of the function minimum.
So let's say that we guessed -0.5.
So that was our initial random guess.
Now the function value itself is like six.
But we don't actually care about that value for this step.
What we care about is the derivative at that value.
So the derivative at -0.5 is like minus six.
Okay, so now that we have our derivative of minus six, we go on to the second step inside this loop.
And that is to update our initial our guess of the minimum.
So the updated guess of the minimum is itself and itself is -0.5.
That was our guess minus the derivative scaled by the learning rate or times the learning rate.
Learning rate is a small number that we use to make sure that we're taking small steps so we don't miss.
The minimum learning rate is a super important parameter in deep learning.
I will have much more to say about the learning rate in later videos.
For now, let's just, you know, just imagine this.
This is some small number.
Maybe it's 0.01.
Okay.
So we update the the guess as itself minus the derivative.
So the derivative here is negative.
So that means we multiply the derivative by minus one.
So that becomes positive and it's positive.
So that means we go to the right.
So we would move up here.
We move up the derivative.
And that gets us closer to the solution, which is where the derivative equals zero.
Now let's imagine we randomly guessed a number over here like 1.5.
This was our initial random guess.
So then we we go through here, we we compute the derivative at 1.5.
And we find that the derivative here is around five a little over five.
So then we update the guess as itself minus the derivative.
So the derivative here is positive.
It's above zero.
So therefore we turn around and we go to the left.
We go in the direction that of the negative derivative.
So that's going to get us in this direction.
So you can see that if we start off being too low we're going to move up towards the function minimum.
If we start off being too high, we're going to go down towards the function minimum.
And eventually we are going to get closer and closer and closer to the function minimum, which is right
here at 0.5.
Five.
All right.
And then it looks something like this.
This is actually a screenshot of the Python code that you will see in a couple videos from now.
So we are going to actually perform gradient descent to find the local minimum of this function f of
x.
So we can see here that the minimum is 0.495, blah blah blah.
Some really, you know, very long number here.
Now is this the correct answer?
It turns out that this is not the correct answer.
And to prove that this is the incorrect answer, we can actually compute the the real minimum of this
function analytically.
And the way we do that is by computing the derivative which we already have, we set the derivative
to zero.
And then we solve for x, and we find that the true minimum of this function is x equals 0.5.
So so gradient descent actually gave us an answer that was close.
You know I'm not saying that it was totally, totally wrong, but it is definitely not accurate.
This is not the correct solution to the minimum of this function.
So there's a couple of points that I want to make here, which I'm going to expand upon quite a bit
throughout the next several sections.
But just to give you a heads up.
Gradient descent is not guaranteed to give us the correct solution.
It's not guaranteed to give us the optimal, the best solution.
There are several circumstances that can make gradient descent algorithm either go completely wrong
or just something like this, where we're pretty close, but we're not actually correct.
One is using a poor choice of model parameters, so we could actually get closer to the correct solution
here by changing the model parameters.
Two is we can get stuck in local minimum.
I'll talk more about that in the next video.
A third issue is we can run into some problems like vanishing gradients or exploding gradients.
And I think that's actually probably all the things that can go wrong.
So gradient descent is a great algorithm.
It's simple and it's very powerful.
Gradient descent is guaranteed to move us towards the direction of a good solution.
It is not necessarily guaranteed to give us the exact correct solution.
Now, fortunately, many of the problems of gradient descent have been overcome in the past decade or
so or two decades of research and development in deep learning.
So there are quite a few tricks that we use in deep learning that will get around some of the problems
of gradient descent.
So therefore the conclusion is that gradient descent is a great algorithm.
It basically always works very well.
It is not guaranteed to work perfectly.
And that's pretty much how gradient descent works.
There isn't really a lot more to it.
There are some tricks and tips.
There's some parameters and implementation details, but you now understand the gradient descent algorithm.